
Hello, everyone, the purpose of this session
is to introduce the main course assignment.
As you can see, the course assignment is essentially
about the US household saving rate.
And the basic question, actually, is whether the Great Recession
had a permanent effect on US household saving or a transitory effect.
Now, this assignment is specifically designed
to test all the techniques and tools that you learned throughout the course.

Let me just walk you through the problem.
Firstly, I'd just like to talk to you a little bit about what's
actually happened to US household saving from 1976 to 2014.
And what you see in front of you is, in the red,
the actual household saving rate.
And in the blue is a smooth representation of that line.
We just smoothed out the short-run variations in the saving rate.
Now, what's particularly evident in this graph
is the downward trend in the saving rate from about 1971
until 2007:4 that's occurred in the US.
And what's particularly startling is that around the time of the Great
Financial Recession, which was actually around 2008,
first quarter, the saving rate jumped rather quickly and dramatically,
and continued to rise till about 2012.
And then it seems to have actually fallen back on its downward path.
So that's essentially the data that you'll be looking at.
And question is whether, in fact, the saving rate
will return to its pre-2008 level.
And obviously, that implies, essentially,
continuation of the downward path that we're starting to observe.
And it's, essentially, equivalent to asking
whether there's been a structural break in the consumption relationship
on or around 2008.
And so that's the assignment.
So how do we go about doing it?
I mean, the first step is for you to develop an empirical model
for forecasting aggregate consumption rather than a saving rate
or emphasize aggregate consumption using data up until 2007Q4.
And then what you need to do is use the model
to forecast consumption and the saving rate during the 2008Q1 to 2014Q3
period, which represents the last data point
available in this particular dataset that I'll introduce later.
So we develop a model, estimate using data
that didn't include the Great Financial Recession,
and now, we're going to use it to forecast consumption
and saving rate during the period that was hit by the financial crisis.
And once you've got the model, we're simply
going to formally assess whether the model can
predict actual consumption, and thus the saving rate, from 2008 onwards.
So that's the basic problem.
Now, obviously, that's the basic problem.
Now, the dataset, it's available in module 1 online.
And it can be found in this file called M1_Data.
And all the data that you'll be working with is in the page file, US_CY,
obviously representing consumption and income relationship.
It's quarterly data, and it spans 1947Q1 to 2014Q4.
Some of the key variables that you'll find in that particular dataset,
and I'm hinting it's some of the variables you will be working with.
Firstly, it's obviously Real Consumption data; Real Disposable Income, rdy;
Real Net Worth, rny; the Unemployment Rate, unemp;
and also, Consumer Sentiment.
So Real Consumption, Real Disposable Income, Real Net Worth.
And you should think of these essential variables
as being essentially designed to predict the long-run path
of overall consumption.
The Unemployment Rate and the Consumer Sentiment variables, I mean,
we're providing them as a means of potentially explaining
short-run movements in rc.
In other words, actual consumption behavior.
So they're the fundamental variables that you'll be working with.
Suggested approach.
Again, using data up to 2007Q4, develop an empirical model
for the long-run behavior in the household consumption.
And you might want to think in terms of the permanent income hypothesis
and explaining real consumption in terms of disposable income
and real net worth.
And in doing this, you want to be very careful to allow
for the fundamental properties of the data, and in particular,
whether the data are stationary or non-stationary.
And then using your preferred long-run model,
which you just estimated as a base, move on
to developing a model to predict the actual consumption behavior,
and that means allowing for variables that
deal with the short-run variation and actual consumption.
Now, obviously, movements in disposable income and real net worth
will also have implications in the short-run movements,
but they're more designed, potentially, to catch the long-run trends
in real consumption behavior.
Now, having done that and developed your short-run model,
you need to actually then connect your short-run model to the saving rate
by using the formula shown in front of you
to link aggregate real consumption or rc to the saving rate.
Now, notice here, the formula is well-known
and taken from the government NIPR accounts, table 2.1.
Notice that, basically, you have real consumption in there.
You have real disposable income.
That's what rdy is.
And you have income deflated to deflate normal payments to the household sector
from the government sector.
And that is the actual definition of the "saving rate."
To use that, add it to whatever you estimate.
You're then ready to both predict the level of real consumption
and the saving rate.
Now, once you're actually satisfied with your empirical model,
you then use it to assess its out-of-sample forecasting performance.
Now, that would probably require to use a simulator, the model simulator.
And the course will explain to you exactly how
you can do that using EViews.
Now, here's the bottom line.
If you can show that your final model can
predict the actual behavior of the saving rate during 2008Q1 to 2014Q3,
basically, that's very strong evidence that the financial crisis has not
changed saving behavior permanently.
So that's the bottom line is that you use the model that's
estimated with data prior to the financial crisis
and that can predict the behavior of the saving rate
after the financial crisis hit.
That's suggesting that there hasn't been a structural break.
Hints.
Some useful hints to help you specify your model.
I think it's worthwhile to start explaining
long-run movements in real consumption by using
real disposable income and real disposable net
worth as your exponential variables.
Now, you're free to experiment with other variables.
Indeed, there are many other variables in the dataset provided to you,
such as the mortgage rate, house prices.
Also, you will even have real government debt to deal with,
possibly the Ricardian equivalence hypothesis.
But it's up to you to essentially specify your long-run relationship.
I'm also suggesting the changes in the confidence level
and the unemployment rate tend to drive short-run movements in consumption,
and thus saving.
So you might want to think of those as exogenous
influences on consumption behavior.
Be sure to inspect before you regress, by which we mean,
essentially plot the data, have a sense of what's
actually happening in the data before you
think in terms of running a regression.
And I would strongly suggest that you look
at the problem in terms of the consumption-income ratio
against net-worth to income ratio, initially,
to get a sense of whether these two variables are moving,
how they're moving together over time.
Basically, it will reveal interesting features
between consumption and income.
And in particular, look out for changes in the relationship, especially
before 1976, and changes in the variability of underlying variables;
in other words, changes in the consumption and income ratio
and the real net-worth to income ratio.
And lastly, a detailed statement of the assignment
can be found in PDF file called M1_Assignment.
And that, basically, sets up the problem and describes in detail
the actual dataset that you'd be working with.
And also, it sets up a number of questions for you
to consider in preparing your solution.
And finally, we will be providing a suggested approach or a solution
at appropriate points in the course, by which I
mean that after you've done a module, say on testing the properties of time
series such as with the stationary and non-stationary,
we'll then apply these techniques to this particular dataset
and show you what the answers or what the outcome is of the various tests
that we're using and the implications that it has
for moving to the next stage of preparing a suggested solution.
So that's the assignment that you'll be working on throughout the course.
It's independent, by the way, of all the workshops and problem sets that you
are given at the end of every module.
It's voluntary, not to be graded, but it's specifically
designed to take you through from the very beginning
to the very end of producing an applied paper which
makes use of all the techniques that this course speaks
about throughout-- sorry, that is specifically designed to make you use
the tools that are introduced in this course
and to show you how to forecast in a fairly realistic setting.
So thank you, and I hope you enjoy the assignment.